JUDY WOODRUFF: Next: bringing
help to developing countries for
a widely untreated birth defect.
Fred de Sam Lazaro has a
report from India's commercial
capital, Mumbai, on a condition
called club foot.
Its part of his ongoing
series Agents for Change.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: It
only sounds painful.
This wailing 5-year-old
is receiving the very
same treatment, a full
leg plaster cast, as
this young, perfectly
happy infant.
The therapy here in Mumbai's
Wadia Charitable Hospital will
save these children from a life
of pain and social isolation
that comes from club foot.
It's a common birth defect
that, in wealthy countries, is
usually corrected early in life.
But in the developing
world, it remains largely
untreated and becomes a
disability, says orthopedist
Dr. ÑMDNMÑAlaric Aroojis.
DR.
ÑMDNMÑALARIC AROOJIS,
Orthopedist: It is probably
the second or third important
cause of physical disability
in India, after road traffic
accidents and trauma.
It's more of a cosmetic
problem initially.
And as they grow older and
they can find that they can no
longer play with their friends,
that's when it starts
sinking in that this is a
functional problem as well.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Club foot
is congenital birth defect in
which a foot, in some cases
both feet, grow inward.
Patients learn to walk
on the side of the foot.
Twenty-six-year-old Madhu
Varma says it's painful for
sustained periods, but like most
sufferers, she's
learned to adapt.
What she could not deal with
was the sight of her daughter,
Madhuri, when she too was
born with club foot.
MADHU VARMA, Mother
(through translator):
It was really difficult.
I cried for days when
I saw my child's foot.
I could not eat.
I was just sick with worry.
But they told me that, with
plaster, they could treat it.
DR.
ÑMDNMÑALARIC AROOJIS:
So this is the daughter
and this is the mother.
And the daughter's foot
is fully corrected.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO:
That correction once
required extensive
surgery, Dr. Aroojis says.
Now treatment in most cases
is a series of casts over
several weeks:, less invasive,
less expensive and less painful.
DR.
ÑMDNMÑALARIC AROOJIS:
It's such a supple method.
We don't force the
foot in any way at all.
So, as you can see, that every
time we move the foot just
as much as the child allows.
This is a procedure which is
done without any anesthetic.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO:
Once corrected, patients
like 5-year-old Nishant
wear a brace attached
to an outward-facing
pair of shoes.
In a few months, as in
this case, it's only needed
at night and nap time.
Nishant shows no sign
of an abnormal gait.
His parents, struggling
slum dwellers, spent
hundreds of dollars at
ill-equipped and poorly
informed private clinics
with little success.
KETAN DHEPE, Father (through
translator): We had never
heard of club foot until he was
born.
We felt terrible, but when
we brought him to Mumbai, two
or three people told me that
Wadia Hospital has
the best treatment.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: That
treatment was developed
by an orthopedic surgeon
named Ignacio Ponseti
half-a-world away here in
Iowa and half-a-century ago.
It would take decades before the
Ponseti method became standard
practice for treating club
foot.
Why do you suppose it
took as long as it did?
CHESCA COLLOREDO-MANSFELD,
Business Consultant: One is that
the kinds of people that were
treating club foot, at
least in the U.S., were
orthopedic surgeons.
And I think they became
surgeons for a reason.
They like doing surgery.
And this was introducing
a nonsurgical technique.
And I think there was
some resistance to that.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Chesca
Colloredo-Mansfeld, a business
consultant, lived in Iowa city,
where Ponseti, a Spanish
immigrant, was a local legend.
CHESCA COLLOREDO-MANSFELD: Dr.
Ponseti's dying wish -- he was
in his 90s at that time -- was
to try to get his treatment
out to the rest of the world.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO:
Colloredo-Mansfeld started
one of several nonprofit
efforts to fulfill
Dr. Ponseti's wish to take the
nonsurgical approach, finally
standard in the U.S., to
developing countries.
She co-founded a charity
in 2010 called Miracle
Feet, supported mostly by
high net worth individuals
and foundations.
It's taken the Ponseti method
and message to clinics in 19
countries so far, with some
23,000 patients, including
those in Mumbai, providing
training and supplies at low or
no cost, including braces
patients will use after their
cast treatments are done.
In India, casting is done by
surgeons, but in countries
where they aren't available,
non-physicians are trained.
Another key role is that
of clinic assistants,
paid by Miracle Feet.
CHESCA COLLOREDO-MANSFELD: They
work to educate that family
during the bracing phase to make
sure that the children wear the
brace at night and complete the
treatment over the next four
years.
So, the correction itself only
takes two to three months,
but the follow-up period of
maintaining that correction
is absolutely critical.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO:
Veteran orthopedic surgeon
Rujuta Mehta says parents
of club foot patients,
once terrified at the prospect
and cost of surgery, are
elated when they discover it's
no longer needed.
DR.
RUJUTA MEHTA, Orthopedic
Surgeon: The acceptability,
therefore, of Ponseti is huge.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO:
Its much simpler, less
intimidating and it's cheaper?
DR.
RUJUTA MEHTA: Yes, absolutely.
Yes, it's cheaper.
And this is the kind of
thing you can apply in
a public health program.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: The number
of children being treated has
tripled over the past decade
or so.
Yet five out of six club
foot patients go untreated in
developing countries like India,
still enduring an easily
correctable condition for
the rest of their lives.
So the challenge is to
get the word out early?
DR.
RUJUTA MEHTA: Absolutely, and
the more awareness there, the
earlier they come, the easier to
treat, the better the
deformity correction.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: A
deformity that is correctable
even in adulthood, as
Madhu Varma discovered
when getting her
daughter treated.
She became the oldest patient
this clinic has ever treated.
DR.
ÑMDNMÑALARIC AROOJIS: There's
a very good possibility that,
just with serial castings
by the Ponseti method, we
should be able to get a
full correction in her.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: She had a
wedding to attend, she told the
doctors, where she and daughter
Madhuri would be able to dance.
For the "PBS NewsHour," this is
Fred de Sam Lazaro in Mumbai.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that
is something to celebrate.
Fred's reporting is a
partnership with the
Under-Told Stories
Project at the University
of St. Thomas in Minnesota.